Assessment 1
Information, Risk and Security
Julian Andrade
Code: 2400111


Data Safety Management in Health Industry and Implementation of Security Standards
 
In any industry around the world nowadays, digital information is the fundamental key to perform operations and processes towards the generation of an outcome; and without it becomes impossible to do it since the speed demanded for external stakeholders can be achieved just through information systems based in software and electronic hardware.
To understand the big picture before analysing the external threats that this kind of systems must face daily, we need to clarify the primordial components processed by them, starting with data, information and knowledge.
In first place data refers to raw, unprocessed facts and figures collected from observations, measurements, or experiments, which can be organized and implemented to derive meaningful information (Oxford English Dictionary, 2024). Which means that data is just the basic blocks of information that have no meaning itself until the user read and analyse it. A clear example is when checking a thermometer, it can display something like “40 Celsius” but it becomes useful information just when the user realize that that temperature is extremely hot for weather conditions.
Following this logic, now we can mention the definition of information. Information is data that has been processed, organized, or structured in a way that ads context, meaning, and relevance, making it useful for decision-making and understanding (Beyond-Davies 2010). As it obvious, the data that is converted in information is driven by the purpose that any situation or context requires, and from this we can go ahead to know what knowledge is.
Knowledge is information that has been comprehended and applied, often gained through experience, education, or reasoning, and used to guide decisions and actions (Davenport and Prusak, 1998). On this way we can conclude that knowledge is the end of an intrinsic process that starts with raw data, followed by information to be transformed into knowledge, all of it leaded for the user (Human) to take actions and achieve an objective, goal or purpose that is needed in most of the cases to supply a need. 
 Now, inside of an organisational context this staggered interrelationship between data, information and knowledge has a paramount importance for an organisation in the health industry as hospitals, laboratories or pharmaceutical facilities. It is because based on data that is converted in information and elevated to knowledge, they achieve their final purpose that is provide tools, treatments and medicines to the public.
Thus, in a health organisation even if at the end the creation of knowledge is the most important outcome, the raw data itself is the most valuable and vulnerable asset that needs to be protected from potential threats, especially external threats driven by persons looking for steal or damage the data for diverse reasons. It does not mean that information and knowledge are not valuable, in fact they are important. However, once the information and knowledge are shared between the human actors in the organisation is easier to be recovered if necessary. For instance, once a person knows how to treat a disease the data from studies that discovered that treatment is not frequently checked anymore for the same disease.
Going forward, managing and protecting data becomes a 24-hour task that cannot be given up at any time, otherwise the probability of losing data or compromising the integrity of data is high and the impact on a health organisation is incommensurable, meaning that this is the main risk to face. 
These risks that this kind of organisation deal with, usually are cyberattacks as DDoS or Rudy; database misconfiguration, untrained personal handling data or losing sensitive pieces of hardware with confidential information, social engineering or even internal threats personified by employees aiming to misuse or steal the company’s data.
On the other hand, we must mention the potential vulnerabilities that are common in health organisations, just in a general way since each organisation has different characteristics that makes them unique. Some of those vulnerabilities are in first place outdated software, because in most of the cases, particularly in hospitals, updating software to catch up with safety trends is not a priority and the only concern is providing access to information and if the software works is not updated. 
Another potential vulnerability are the weak passwords, that are not complicated enough, easy to guess or even saved in the facilities devices giving access to any information just with a click. Insufficient data encryption and access controls are another vulnerability derived from a lack of attention over cyber security, and from this fact derives that most of hospitals or health facilities has a reduce number of employees serving as cybersecurity staff, which means a lack of incident response plan or at least enough skilled personal ready to apply an incident response plan if any.
Fortunately, there are standards to be followed and applied in health organisations and improve their capacities dealing with the mentioned vulnerabilities. Some of them are the ISO 27001 and the NIST Cybersecurity Framework, developed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).
The first one gives a comprehensive standard that gives detailed requirements for an information security management system (ISMS), helping to any organisation to stablish, maintain and improve continuously their own ISMS.
The second one offers more flexibility regarding the requirements and is designed mostly for organisations handling controlled unclassified information (CUI) doing emphasis on managing and reducing the cybersecurity risks.
For our case focused on the health industry, which has within its characteristics the fact of storing confidential data regarding medical records, research and even experiments when developing advanced projects such as vaccination or new drugs. All these mean that the most appropriate standard to implement for an organisation in this industry is the ISO 27001 since contains a strong emphasis on handling confidential information, stablish strict controls on security and data access. 
To apply this standard, first is necessary to evaluate the organisation on which is going to be implemented, because even if the organisation is in the health industry is obvious that every case is different. However, there are some general steps to approach and develop a proper implementation in any company belonging to the health industry.
For starters is of paramount importance to identify the scope in the organisation, so that critical stuff as assets, processes and people involved are covered in the implementation of the ISO 27001. Secondly a deep evaluation of the risks threatening the organisation must be performed, as well as evaluation on potential vulnerabilities targeting the critical data stored by the organisation.
After these two steps, their outcomes will be used to stablish the ISMS based in the specifical needs detected, developing a comprehensive information security policy, security objectives, select a proper information security management team that will oversee leading the implementation of selected standard.
Afterwards, the selected team will be able to proceed with the implementation phase that will be developed following different levels of control, such selection control when selecting the appropriate controls mechanisms such internal audits and others from the ISO 27001 which fit to the specific risks and requirements of the organisation and besides, a proper documentation including procedures, policies and off course, records of the work done.
Once all of this is done, a periodic maintenance will be the main strategy to minimise risks and will make possible to monitor and to measure the performance of the implemented ISMS, following for audits that lead to corrective actions if required and preventive actions considering the trends in cybersecurity. On the other hand, a defensive-preventive strategy must be in place and will include the implementation of technical measures such as Network Intrusion Detection systems (NIDS), implementation of Content Delivery Networks (CDNs), regular updates, output encoding or Web Application Firewall (WAF), as well as non-technical measures such as regular employee training, access control policies, phishing simulations, social engineering awareness or third-party risk assessments.  
Additionally, an Incident Response Plan must be created, and it needs to include critical points as recovery systems, Backups systems, incident classification, prioritization criteria, skilled personal involved or proper incident documentation,
Finally, aiming for assurance the management must review the whole system to guarantee a proper functioning, updating and reliability along the time, and furthermore a continuous improvement to avoid at most any kind of incident that put in risk the organisation data.
As we can see, it is not easy to implement the ISO21007 from scratch and it requires a lot of effort and professional staff with experience in cyber security to have positive outcomes from the implementation. However, besides all the mentioned before, a good governance is key to success, and it goes besides policies, procedures and practices in the management. It comprehends the right persons to fill key positions that are responsible to communicate and enforce the standards, guidelines, procedures and practices.
This is why in addition to the information security management team leading the actions, an interdisciplinary information security committee must oversee the ISMS and take the critical decisions taking into account the wellbeing of the organisation and the prime purpose of all these efforts that is not other than protect data that later will be information and further will be turn into knowledge. 

Reflection Paragraph
During the creation of the previous essay, some sources were consulted through internet, such as dictionaries online or the websites as the NIST and ISO websites. Also, using generative AI was possible to gather some information easily, but just a reading resource since all the writing text came from my own effort. Evidence of this is the information printed in the last paragraph from page 2 and first paragraph from page 3, were briefly explained to the reader the reasons of why ISO27001 is a better option for the discussion case than the NIST Cyber security framework. On the other hand, material from ADCI was used to have an idea of the topic and clarify some doubts about it, and as a result I understand the baseline of the essay in the context of Information Security and Risk management, which led me to connect ideas and develop the essay.
 As addition, is clear that using generative AI helped to speed up the process of gathering information as well as summarizing it, saving of this way time. However, it was clear to me that following the AI prompts blindly is not an option since the goal of this academic effort is learning, and that is why this kind of tools must be used exactly as that, as a tool but never as an source of processed text ready to use, and on the contrary its content must be read and analysed to be used properly and in a meaningful manner. 
