SEC 102 Information, Risk and Security  
 
Assignment 1  
 
Data, Information and Knowledge  
 
Data, at its beginning level, is raw and unprocessed. It can be technological or physical, a nd often 
consists of numbers or strings. This raw data is also often flexible and subject to change.  
 
After data has been processed and contextualized, it becomes information. Information is data that has 
been organized and interpreted to provide context, making it meaningful. Although information is 
processed and contextualized data , different people may interpret the same information differently 
depending on their experiences.  
 
This brings us to Knowledge, which is the collective amount of past human experience. Knowledge 
involves applying information given using one’s own experience and insight. Since knowledge relies 
heavily on past experiences, some individuals with more experience are often better able to utilize 
information effectivel y and make better informed decisions based on it.  
 
 
 
 
 Healthcare Organizations  
 
Healthcare organizations are a perfect example of how data at their different stages can be used. At its 
raw stage, healthcare organizations might as k patients about their name, age, height, weight and record it 
in their system. Using this data, they have information on the patient who can diagnose them on their 
illness. After getting information on what illness they have, using their knowledge, doctors can provide the 
right medicine to the patients . 
 
In this scenario, data would be the most important component within the  healthcare organization  that a 
potential threat actor will value. Since healthcare organizations require to collect large amounts  of data 
from patients , potential threat actors will try and extract client data through breaches . “Large repositories 
containing medical records are valuable to cybercriminals as medical records include Social Security and 
credit card numbers, patient demographics, addresses, insurance identification numbers, and other 
medical information, and can sell  on the black market for as much as 20 times the cost of a stolen credit 
card number.”  Moffit, R. and Steffen, B. (2017). Health Care Data Breaches: A Changing Landscape.  
 
Healthcare organizations are prone to potential cyberattacks that can affect their collective data. They 
have several potential threats they face such as, Insider threats, Phishing attacks, physical hardware theft 
and natural disasters.  “The top three types of breaches include: hacking/IT incident, theft, and 
unauthorized access/disclosure ”. Moffit, R. and Steffen, B. (2017). Health Care Data Breaches: A Changing Landscape.  
They also face vulnerabilities such as lack of encryption, poor back -up practices, outdated technology 
and inadequate access controls.  
 
 
 Potential Threats and Vulnerabilities  
 
The healthcare organization should investigate these threats and vulnerabilities they might face and find a 
way to mitigate them . They should make sure that they  improve their access controls, conduct regular 
employee training , enhance encryption and review their risk levels to find out which risk to tackle first.  
 
NIST Cybersecurity Framework  
 
NIST Cybersecurity Framework (NIST CSF) is a set of guidelines to help organizations manage and 
reduce cybersecurity risk. It consists of a set of practices  to help improve an organization’s cybersecurity 
posture, and the framework is organized into five core functions, identify, protect, detect, respond and 
recover.   
The NIST CSF guideline can help healthcare organizations by identifying all assets that store, process or 
transmit data and conducting regular risk assessments to identify the potential threats and to assess the 
impact level of these risks on data confidentiality, integrity and availability.  
To protect is to implement  strong access control measures and enhance data encryption to prevent 
unauthorized access to sensitive information. Providing regular training  and improving awareness also 
helps to prevent employees from falling victim to phishing and social engineering attacks.  
To detect is to use software tools to monitor and capture audits of any unauthorized access to confidential 
data.  Implementing Intrusion detection systems is one way to capture audit logs to track any anomalies in 
the syste m. 
To respond is to develop and implement an incident response plan, a procedure to contain, eradicating 
and recovering from data breaches in case of a da ta breach . It is also important to ensure that the 
response plan includes communication strategies to notify stakeholders and patients.  To recover is to create a recovery plan to restore healthcare data and system to normal operations after a 
data breach. It is important that backups are regularly performed and after such attacks, a post incident 
review should take place to improve data protection measures.  
 
Management Strategies  
 
There are many technical ways to minimize risks that are associated with data breaches. Improving data 
encryption helps to make sure that data is much more secure from unauthorized access. Implementing  
multi -factor -authorization helps to improve access control and prevents unauthorized access to data . 
Regular data backup helps restore the system to normal operations faster in case of data alterations.  
Improving intrusion detection systems helps to check for any malicious behavior in the organization’s 
systems and can notify administrators.  
Non-technical measures include  employee training, physical security  and vendor management. 
Conducting regular training sessions for employees helps  to educate staff on how to practice safe 
cybersecurity practices and raise awareness on phishing and social engineering tactics used by hackers.  
Improving physical security like security cameras can help prevent the risk of hardware theft. By 
evaluating security practices of t hird-party vendors , it is important to ensure that they comply with the 
security standards to protect sensitive info rmation of the organization.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chat GPT (AI Tool)   
The AI tool I used was Chat GPT . It helped me to understand certain requirements of the essay. I used 
Chat GPT to help me refine my words and to understand further on certain details . AI has been a good 
tool to help understand some of the topics better and provide me with some real -life cases that I can use 
as examples to further support my statement in the essay using report writing of other authors. Previously 
without AI as well, using search engines like google would take some time before I would understand 
certain topics. But with AI , it has certainly helped me understand faster and much better.   
 
References  
Moffit, R. and Steffen, B. (2017). Health Care Data Breaches: A Changing Landscape . [online]  
https://mhcc.maryland.gov/mhcc/pages/hit/hit/documents/HIT_DataBreachesBrief_Brf_Rpt_090717.pdf  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Chat GPT Chat Logs  
 
 
 
