Information, ri sk and s ecurity  – Assessment 1 
Data refers to unorgani zed facts and figures about various subjects or objects that can be qualitative 
(described by words) or quantitative (numbers, amounts). It can be easily modified and processed to 
get the useful information like reports and supports in decision -making process , identifying trends 
and measuring organization’s performance. In financial context, data can be of different types like 
income statements, stock prices , sales, investments , customer feedback etc., which is further used in 
identifying and managing risk, analyzing, and making plans for future.  
Information is a subset of processed, organi zed and interpreted  data  to get some relevant meaning 
and context.  It needs human involvement and can be affected by personal experiences, thinking 
abilities and situations. Humans get raw data, gather useful points from it, think about it and apply 
their understanding and experience to turn data into something fruitful and interesting. For example, 
if a chart showing customer feedback, it is unuseful until a person (employee or leader) will not 
review it and unde rstand the reason about feedback s. Information is very crucial in making 
important decision,  strategic planning, problem -solving and risk management.  
Knowledge is a sum of human experiences, personal views, education we gained and culture we 
came from. It depends on context and applied on every situation in a different way. As the problem 
changes, new information comes into existence which leads to the updation and expansion of 
knowledge world. So, knowledge is dynamic and ever -evolving. That’s why knowledge helps in better 
understanding, supports effective problem mitigating methods and keep pace with innovations and 
improvements. Following  the above ex ample, data chosen was customer feedback, filterize and 
observing  of feedbacks gives us information a bout customers’ opinion and by understanding the 
good and bad reviews, the institute can work on it and can get more customers and a faithful 
reputation.  
So, it can be stated that data is raw and unprocessed details, information is processed data and 
knowledge is relevant and actionable information. Therefore, knowledge is actionable data.  
In context to a finance industry, data is the most valuable component  to a potential threat actor  
because of its high sensitivity. Financial data like bank account numbers of customers, their credit 
card details, personal identification information should be private. If this kind of data is stolen or 
gained by unauthorised institutes or individuals th en it can lead to financial loss, identity theft and 
loss of trust. Threat actors can check the account history, their spendings and interests, can make 
purcha ses illegally and can make a wealthy person fall in debt. For example, if a person is spending a 
large sum of his income on medicines and his bank details are accessed by hackers then this 
information can become a vulnerability and can be easily targeted by potential threat act or. At last, 
leads to financial loss to individual and institution.  Moreover, stolen financial data can be shared 
publicly, used to bully a person or a company and can be sold to other cybercriminals at a very high 
value. Every indivi dual wants privacy of their data and even every organisation is practising under 
some legal rules and regulations.  They have to follow stringent security protocols and if they break 
the regulations that can result in paying high amount of fines and some legal actions.  In addition, 
Cybercriminals can encrypt financial data, demand for ransom payments and affecting transaction 
processes and other operations. According to  ASD Cyber Threat Report (2022 -23), As data breaches 
is not a small loss, it can effect the trust and expectations of customers and resulting in a bad 
reputation in the market.  
- https://www.accc.gov.au/media -release/hsbc -pays -penalties -for-alleged -breaches -of-
consumer -data -right -rules   
Every organization should conduct a risk assessment involved in every functioning so that it can be 
easily managed and mitigated. Data is found as the most important component in finance industry 
because it needs to be private, and only authorised persons can retrieve it. In risk assessment, first 
there is an identification of potential threats and weaknesses which are combined with critical data 
and further is the evaluation of impact on the organization. In a financial institute, the potential 
threats can  be cyber attacks like phishing, ransomware and data breaches. Cybercriminals use 
deceptive emails or messages, malware that make data inaccessible for personal interests or money -
purposes and get unauthorised gain to systems to expose the data and sharing  on dark web. 
Furthermore, threats can be from inside of an organization who can misuse the sensitive data for 
personal revenge, greed or damage to organization, these are known as malicious insiders. 
Sometimes, threat actor arise accidently as some employ ees lack training and they, by mistake, 
compromise the data security by falling in trap of scams and reckless actions. There can exist some 
tangible threats such as losing of systems or storage media containing data and some technical 
threats such as corru ption of data due to weak software. Diving deeply, vulnerabilities in third -party 
services can attract hackers to access the financial data of a reputed organization.  
Cybercriminals attacks because of the existing vulnerabilities. A finance company has several areas of 
vulnerabilities. First of all, the weak authentication methods and insufficient encryption are the 
methods of easily accessing the data by unauthorized p arties. There should be multi -factor 
authentication and fully protected encryption for every crucial dataset. Secondly, employees can be a 
vulnerability if they are not trained with updated techniques as they can be baited by attackers 
through phishing and  hence expose private data accidently. Others can do so to take some revenge 
from leaders or specific individuals. Last but not least, inadequate recovery  backups are the 
vulnerabilities in case of a disaster and operation disruption.  
ISO, the International Organization for Standardization publish international standards to make lives 
easier, safer and better. ISO 27001 is a type of a standard mainly designed  for information security 
management systems (ISMS). It provides all companies and every sector a standard  to establish , 
implement , maintain  an ISMS. It helps organizations to become risk -aware and identify weakness 
related to the security of data stored by the company. It helps companies to maintain data integrity, 
confidentiality and availability, organization -wide protection and preparedness  for new -threats. 
Three important principles in ISO 27001, also known as CIA triad helps to protect data in companies. 
Confidentiality allows only authorised people to access the important data to prevent cybercriminals 
to gain it. Integrity maintains the data an organization holds for its services is reliably stored and 
cannot be erased. Availability make data available to the organization and its client whenever needed 
to meet the expectations of both. So, CIA triad helps to protect the organization data through the 
proper working standards.  
-https://www.iso.org/standard/27001  
Risk management strategy helps to identity and mitigate risks.  Organizations should execute a mix of 
technical and non -technical measures to manage and minimize risks. While handling data online, 
data encryption is one of the best practices to transforms data into a secure way so that only right 
people can view it.  While transmitting the data, Transport Layer Security and only secure websites 
should be used. Use AES (Advanced Encryption Standard) to keep the data  safe which is  stored on 
devices. Implementi ng a  multi-factor Authentication to gain sensitive data for making more secure 
than passwords. Always perform automation to systems to get the updates and implement a patch 
management process to update the systems and software continuously. Frequent backups and recovery testing help to recover all of the updates and improvements. Furthermore, some security 
awareness trainings should be promoted to train employees to make them a match with upcoming 
skills and advancements. There should be an incident response team  and incident response plan for 
every organization in the situation  of a data hacked . Regularly auditing and risk assessments should 
be implemented to deal with vulnerabilities and implement security measures. Every sensitive data 
should be licensed with legal agreements and regulatory compliance.  
A data protection plan must be set up to look at the policies, roles and responsibilities. It will be the 
best if a Data Protection Officer (DPO) is appointed to oversee the plan and security strategies. In 
regards to assurance, encryption practices and po licies must be continuously checked and proper 
evaluation of third -party vendors should be done while dealing with outsiders. Control mechanisms 
focus on compliance checks and audit trails which ensures data security and policy adherence.  
Reference ----- 
https://copilot.microsoft.com/sl/cR50K6oQ0S4  
https://copilot.microsoft.com/sl/jAYOkVMn8Vw  
 
 
 