HUMAN KNOWLEDGE AND ITS INFLUENCE ON ORGANIZATIONS: A VISION ON 
INFORMATION SECURITY IN THE FINANCIAL SECTOR THROUGH (ISO) 27001  
Fabio Martinez - 2400119  
 
 
Nowadays our world has been evolving in technological development, where every context of our 
lives has been highly influenced by technology and its advances, making us increasingly dependent 
on it, but by believing that we are people "outside" an unreal world, we almost never ask ourselves 
about the possible risks to which we can expose ourselves when interacting with new technologies 
and their continuous development.  
 
As a natural part of our essence, human beings capture what happens around us through our 
senses (smell, touch, sight, taste and hearing) in order to function in everyday life, identifying 
necessary components for our development and survival itself; Many times these senses can be 
altered or manipulated by other human beings, nature itself or technology to modify our behavior 
patterns, alter the perception of the world and influence our decision making; as humans we are 
vulnerable to this type of stimuli th at can be external or internal, likewise companies as 
organizations created by humans have the same characteristics of vulnerability in their own 
components.  
 
In order to understand a little better what I mean, it is necessary to understand some key concepts, 
the human being stores "data" in his brain from what his senses manage to perceive, by analyzing 
this data he generates new "information" that will be usef ul for himself and by putting this 
information into practice out of curiosity in his environment he obtains new "knowledge" through his 
experience. This process can also be applied or reflected in organizations, in an organizational 
context, these componen ts are interrelated and can be seen when the data is collected and stored; 
information is generated when the data is processed and organized; and knowledge is created 
when the information is interpreted and used for decision making. The importance of these  
components lies in the fact that each one contributes to the organization's ability to operate 
efficiently, its capacity for innovation, and its process of creating differential factors compared to 
other organizations. Therefore, it can be concluded that without accurate data, information will be 
incomplete; without relevant or important information, knowledge will be limited; and without 
knowledge, decisions will not have a major impact on organizational development.  
 
Through this introduction to the primary components that are part of human and organizational 
knowledge, it must be taken into account that, as I mentioned above, these same components can 
be vulnerable to various types of threats. At an organizational lev el, from my point of view, the 
financial sector is one of the most vulnerable sectors within the general development of society, 
since its information is the most valuable component for potential malicious actors; this is because 
the information stored by financial entities is highly sensitive, as an example of this we find the 
customer database, financial transfer data, bank account details, market strategies, in short, a 
variety of processes that require essential information for each of their executions.  All this 
information, being an important part of the operational development of financial organizations, is 
also a type of information sought to commit criminal acts or manipulate the market in general; it 
must be taken into account that almost the entire  human population is involved or has a relationship 
with the financial sector, either through a private or governmental entity.  
 
Because information is a vital component within financial organizations when handling large 
volumes of sensitive information, there are international standards that provide general control 
standards for organizations, helping in the control and management of information. As an example 
of these standards (ISO), ISO 27001 can be referenced, which provides guidelines for security 
management, including policies, procedures and controls designed to protect confidential 
information.  
 
According to a conversation with ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2024), in how the ISO27001 standard can help 
protect information in financial organizations, the following ways were identified:   
1. Threat and Vulnerabilities Identification:  The standard requires a thorough risk assessment, 
allowing financial organizations to identify specific threats and vulnerabilities related to their 
critical information.  
 
2. Comprehensive Protection:  In addition to protecting digital information, ISO 27001 also 
addresses physical and organizational aspects of security, ensuring that all aspects of 
information, from storage to transmission, are protected.  
 
3. Effective Security Controls:  ISO 27001 provides a set of security controls and measures that 
organizations can apply to protect information. These controls range from access management 
and encryption to protection against cyber attacks.  
 
Based on the result of the information obtained, I will illustrate a simple information risk assessment 
analysis in the financial sector, consolidating some possible threats in contrast to the vulnerabilities 
that may be present in an organization in gener al and how these can be managed through technical 
and non -technical prevention strategies to minimize the risks:  
 
THREATS  VULNERABILITIES  
• Cyberattacks: Attempts to access financial 
systems to steal sensitive information.  
 
• Phishing: Means of deceiving employees to 
obtain confidential information.  
 
 
• Internal leaks: Disgruntled or malicious 
employees who could leak critical 
information.  • Outdated systems: Lack of software updates 
can make systems vulnerable to attacks.  
 
• Training deficiencies: Lack of cybersecurity 
training can increase the likelihood of falling 
victim to phishing attacks.  
 
• Weak access controls: Lack of adequate 
measures to restrict access to sensitive 
information.  
TECHNICAL MEASURES  NON -TECHNICAL MEASURES  
• Data encryption: Protect information from 
access by unauthorized persons or entities.  
 
 
 
• Authentication: Require some form of 
authentication (facial reader, fingerprint 
reader, variable passwords, etc.) to access 
vital systems and sensitive data.  
 
• Monitoring: Use monitoring systems to 
detect suspicious activity and potential 
security breaches.  • Continuous training: Ensure that all 
employees receive regular and up -to-date 
training in information security so that 
attacks can be prevented in practice.  
 
• Clear policies and procedures: Establish 
and communicate clear policies on 
information management so that you know 
how to act in the event of potential incidents.  
 
• Security culture: Promote an organizational 
culture that values information security and 
data protection.  
 
Furthermore, as a result of research on international standards and by analyzing the information 
provided by artificial intelligence (AI), the need to frame the generalities of the ISO standard within 
some basic principles is reflected, among them it shoul d be mentioned that within a governance 
mechanism it is necessary to implement policies that help to supervise information security and that 
said policies are periodically reviewed for more effective update processes in terms of prevention 
and action again st possible new threats; establish guarantee mechanisms which evaluate 
compliance with the policies and ensure compliance with the standards of each of the standards 
that ensure the protection of information; and establish control mechanisms which allow id entifying 
new vulnerabilities in information systems, contingency measures can be established and 
responsibility is assigned to each of the actors involved.  
 Even though today, human beings depend on technology, we must take advantage of tools such as 
AI in research work, since these provide, from their programming, well -founded ideas to be taken 
into account in the process of knowledge reinforcement. However, their use must be restricted, 
since the objective of each investigation is to be able to find gaps in which the human mind can 
investigate and make decisions in organizational instances. For example, when using AI in this 
essay, I was able to realize that its use is beneficial when clear research parameters are provided, 
otherwise it can only provide general data that can simply be found in other research sources 
(articles, standards, procedures).  
 
In conclusion, understanding human and organizational interactions through the relationships 
between data, information, and knowledge is essential to effectively manage information security in 
any organization. In the financial sector, information is the m ost valuable asset for threat actors, 
which requires a comprehensive security strategy. Organizations must implement standards such 
as ISO 27001 and apply protective measures (technical and non -technical) as vital strategies to 
mitigate or eliminate risks.  In addition, the strategic use of tools such as AI can significantly improve 
information security management in financial organizations.  
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES:  
 
 
• (No date) ISO/IEC 27001:2022 compliance - amazon web services (AWS). Available at: 
https://aws.amazon.com/compliance/iso -27001 -faqs/ (Accessed: 26 August 2024).  
 
• ISO27001 Security Information (no date) DNV. Available at: https://www.dnv.com/ar/services/iso -
27001 -sistema -de-gestion -de-security -de-la-informacion -3327/ (Accessed: 27 August 2024).  
 
• ChatGPT. How does ISO 27001 help protect information in financial organizations? Available 
from: https://www.chatgpt.com/. [Accessed Aug 26, 2024].  
 
• Olavsrud, T. (2023) What is data governance? Best Practices for the Management of These 
Assets, CIO. Available at: https://www.cio.com/article/2066024/what -is-data-governance -good -
practices -for-management - of-these -assets.html (Accessed: 31 August 2024).  
 
• Google, 2024. Google Translate, [online] 1 September 2024. Available at: 
https://translate.google.com  [Accessed 1 September 2024].  