Data, Information, And Knowledge in The Context of 
Information Security and Risk Management . 
 
Data and intelligence have been used interchangeable to the point where we associate them as 
being the same,  but they are just related so we associate them as being the same. With data and 
information,  we gain knowledge to help us in our daily lives. In this essay we will discuss how 
data, information and knowledge is used in a finance organisation to help with security and risk 
management.  
 Data can be defined as a raw, unprocessed facts and figures that re quire processing to acquire 
meaning from them. For example, numbers, names or dates.  To relate it to a finance organisation 
data will be account numbers, credit card details and transaction amounts.  Following this is 
information which is processed or interpreted data that is organised and structured to provide 
context and meaning to the data. For example, the names and dates of students who borrowed 
books from the library. In a finance set ting information will be ‘$500 withdrawn on September 
1st’. Finally, knowledge is what you gain when you combine information with human experiences 
and the more information the more the knowledge evolves. For example, understanding a clients  
behaviour based on their withdrawal  trends  and knowing what they are withdrawing the money 
for. The finance industry’s most crucial component out of data, information and knowledge is 
data. This is because data is the only piece of information that is valuable to cybercriminals and 
hackers. Data such as account numbers, transacti on records and credit card details are only a few 
of the many raw data that is extremely valuable to potential threat actors.  These data can be used 
to access bank accounts, make unauthorised purchases and this data can be sold to the highest 
bidder for their personal use. Let's say for instance there is a cyberattack to a bank. The potential 
threats are ransomware where they hold data and requesting a ransom for its release.  This could 
be caused by a malicious software on that an employee mistakenly opened or a hacker sent into 
the system.  Another threat that could have caused the caused the cyberattack is by social 
engineering where  the cybercriminal sends a phishing  email impersonating  a higher up in the 
company. All these attacks could be effective because of some vulnerabilities in the system such 
as, inadequate encryption  and insufficient monitoring and loggings. If the encryption on sensitive 
data is weak it provides  cybercriminals the opportunity to find a crack in the encryption and gain 
access to the system and attack it.  Insufficient  loggings and monito ring will give a rise to insider 
attacks since they think more often than not  it will be overlooked as an error and not be 
investigated . This potential  could be prevented or mitigated with information security standards 
and a risk management plan.  
An information security standard is a set of policies provided to a business to help them prevent 
or mitigate cyberattacks, breaches and potential risk to the organisation . The bank could use the 
“National Institute Standards and Technolo gy Cybersecurity Framework ”. NIST cybersecurity 
framework is a widely known framework or standard that has a set of guidelines, best practices, and standards that help organizations manage and reduce cybersecurity risks. Its components are 
identity, protect, detect, respond and recover. Identify involves creating a thorough risk 
assessment to identify the potential and vulnerabilities to the financial data. For example, going 
through the systems that store sensitive customer information and assessing the risks associated 
with those systems. Protect deals with contr olling who can and cannot access the data and also 
provides m multi factor authentication for extra protection. Detect component involves using an 
Intrusion detection system to detect and alert the system on potential threats or unauthorised 
access to the data.  After this is respond wh ich involves creating an Incident response plan and to 
maintain and update the IRP on data breaches and cyberattacks. So that when a breach occurs 
there's a ready plan to mitigate the breach and notify any parties involved in an appropriate time. 
Lastly, recover which is simply Backing up data and business continuity planning  which 
incorporate cybersecurity into the organisation continuity plan so that they can still provide 
services in a cybersecurity crisis.  
A management strategy to minimise risk associated with data in the finance organisation will 
involve technical and non -technical measures . The technical  measures should include multifactor 
authentication to improve the confidentiality of accessing the account. It should also include 
strong encryption of the data for instance the data is encrypted at the start and en d point to assure 
a secure transit. Intrusion detection and prevention systems that monitor network traffic for signs 
of malicious activity.  Now for the non -technical measures, w e can include, data classification, 
incidence response plan  and employee training in cybersecurity. Classifying financial data by 
sensitivity and the severity if it was accessed by the wrong person  and implement measures to 
secure that that does not happen. Creating an incidence response plan will help the organisation 
review their steps to dealing with the attacks  and a ny ways they can update it to improve their 
response to the incident.  Finally, all employees need to be well trained in cybersecurity to be able 
to identify phishing messages and emails. This will help the organisation to reduce preventable 
data breaches that were caused by uneducated and uninformed employees and save the 
organisations data and also a lot of money.  
Considering the potential risk that were identifie d in the earlier paragraph we can use 
governance, assurance and control mechanism to manage these finance data breaches . If we 
consider the risk of a phishing attack on a banks confidential data, a way to manage it with 
governance is to establish a thorough security governance framework that aligns with the 
organization's business objectives and regulatory requirements.  The bank can implement 
Information security policies that describe the organisations approach to managing cybersecurity 
risk such as cybercriminals, phishing attacks and insider threats.  An assurance mechanism for the 
bank facing a risk of cyberattacks  such as phishing and insider threats is to provide independent 
verification that security controls are useful.  This can be achieved by having regular  audits both 
internal and external. Internal being a regular audit inside the bank. The external audit involves 
giving your organisat ions online activity logs to a third party like a cybersecurity specialist to 
double check your audit to make sure you didn’t miss anything. Another way to implement this 
is to create a “Security Information and Event Management (SIEM) ”. The SIEM systems  will 
aggregate and analyse security events in real time. This will improve the detection of suspicious activity  on the network of the bank and have a fast and efficient way to manage it. The control 
mechanism involves controlling the financial sensi tive data and controlling who is granted access 
to them too. Some ways to control this is to control Encryption at both ends of transit. At the 
start and end point to assure a secure transit. It protects from scammers  and hackers trying to 
copy or access the data . Data loss prevention  will be implemented to mitigate the loss of 
sensitive financial data. Finally, Physical security, such as storing the data is a well -protected and 
well monitored  facility in the bank and can only be accessed by biometrics such as fingerprint , 
facial recognition  or even voice activation .  
In summary, data is raw unprocessed facts and figures that are well processed and organised to 
provide information for users to use to gain knowledge about the data and use it in their various 
organisations. The finance industry most crucial or valuable component  out of these three is their 
data. Their data can be used to access users accounts make withdrawals or deposits  and that data 
is valuable as i t can be sold to the highest bidder. Luckily risk management plans can be 
implemented to this organisation to be able to protect the data from malicious activity, 
cyber criminals  and social engineering attacks such as phishing and impersonation messages. 
Some of the data breaches can simply be prevented by employees being well trained in 
cybersecurity to be able to detect phishing emails which are the most common form of 
cyberattacks. Some incidences need further help and that is why an incidence response plan and 
having information security standards for your organisation is crucial in managing all the 
growing cyber threats that the finance industry f ace all the time. Having a policy to govern your 
data management, the assurance that the policy will be implemented and the controls to secure 
all that data is always protected it enough to be able to manage any potential risk and threats 
towards the data.  
 
 
 
 
 
Gen AI usage  
For the prompt below I asked chat gpt to further the explain the assignment and the requirements 
and this is what I g ot. I used this to define data, information and knowledge. Which i 
paraphrased.   
 
 
 
 
After I got what I needed for the assignment because it gave me a general response. I chose to 
talk about the finance industry in my e ssay, I asked for examples specifically related to the 
finance industry and this is what I got, and I paraphrased most of the information I got from this. 
I paraphrase most of the content but kept the names of each dot point.   
 
 
 
 
 
I asked chat gpt for the information security standards that the bank could implement for the risk 
of potential threats that they could face and to relate it to the finance industry and this is what I 
got in response  
 
 
 
 
 
I used the chat gpt to get information about the assurance, governance and control. Since I asked 
it to provide me with a lot of  information about it. Including their definitions and their purpose 
and a variety of options to choose from for this . I chose a few and paraphrased them to my 
understanding of them.  
 
 
Reflective paragraph  
Using GenAI for the assignment proved easy in my opinion and It made this assignment easy for 
me to complete as a whole. It provided we with definitions and key words that related to the 
subject matter of this essay which was data, information and knowledg e and their relation to the 
finance industry and risk management strategies to use to manage any form of cyberattacks. I 
found that if you do not specify what you want you will be provided with a vague response that 
might sound reasonable to you at the tim e but upon further research you will receive an better 
answer.  
