   
 
  1 
 Assessment 1: Data, Information and Knowledge.  
SEC102 Information Risk and Security  
 
Introduction:  
Data, information, and knowledge are becoming increasingly important in the organizational setting of 
today's digital world. These ideas support decision -making, creativity, and competitive advantage. 
Effective information security and risk management requires  a thorough understanding of these linkages 
and their relative importance.  
A set of uncontextualized raw facts and figures is referred to as data. A piece of data can be an image, 
text, number, or symbol that has been gathered using different techniques such as measurements and 
observations. For illustration, let's look at data f rom the healthcare industry. This could include the 
patient's vital signs,  or the lab results obtained during the examination. Let's  move on to information. 
Information is defined as data that has been contextualized and processed.  Information  answers to the 
following four "W" and one "H" questions: who, where, when, what, and how. Let's use healthcare as a 
comparable example. For instance, when a patient's data is arranged according to their medical history, 
this information helps medical expe rts decide on the best course of action. Let's finally discuss 
knowledge. Knowledge is the comprehension and skill that are derived from material . Let's use healthcare 
as an example. Best treatment procedures are based on evidence and expertise in this field of 
knowledge.  
Data, information, and knowledge are thought to relate to one another hierarchically. The framework that 
describes these relationships is known as the Data -Information -Knowledge -Wisdom (DIKW) model. 
According to this paradigm, the data serves as a basis, i s contextualized to become information, and is 
then experienced and analyzed to become knowledge. For a company, this paradigm can be quite 
valuable because it facilitates strategic planning and well -informed decision -making.  
Healthcare sector and Potential Threats:     
 
  2 
 Let's choose the health sector as the industry of choice for this essay. The most valuable element in this 
situation that could be a potential threat is knowledge. In this sector , knowledge contributes crucial 
insights and skills that might help  in patient treatment, but it can also be misused  for nefarious and 
unlawful purposes . For instance, information on treatment guidelines, patient care standards, and recently 
announced medical research can be utilized to influence treatment choices and create fraudulent medical 
devices. Threat actors may acquire expertise in this sector  and use it improperly to create fake 
medications and devices , alter clinical recommendations for personal benefit, give competitors access to 
private information  about new treatment , etc. Serious consequences from such activities could include 
jeopardizing patient safety, harming the reputation of healthcare organizations, and incurring financial 
losses.  
Risk Assessment:  
Now, let's move further to risk assessment. Health risk assessment is defined by identifying potential 
threats and vulnerabilities that  can affect the healthcare sector. Some p otential threats and vulnerabilities 
are listed below:  
1. Potential Threats:  
Insider Threat: A person with some form of employment contract for the organization and 
thus has privileges of accessing such information yet holds animosity or stands to benefit from 
the negative impact of such information on others. undefined  
 
Data breaches:  These are a potential risk because hackers can take advantage of system 
vulnerabilities to gain sensitive information as knowledge . 
 
Physical Theft:  The loss of physical items that store patient information like computers, 
servers or any storage system. This can create a serious ris k. 
    
 
  3 
 Natural disasters:  Sudden and unpredictable factors such as floods, fire, earthquake, etc. 
may wipe out or damage the information that is stored physically or in IT.  
 
2. Vulnerabilities:  
Poor Access Control:  If authentication is not strong enough, third parties could be able to access 
or misuse the knowledge.  
 
Lack of  Employee Training : It is a fact that the chances of security breaches in an 
organization that does not train employees related to information security, increased threats or 
new and update procedures increase.  
 
Outdated  System : Neither the IT is same today nor will it  be tomorrow, because everyday 
things are changing in positive way and negative way, so people need to update their IT system 
in organization too . The method  of attack is evolv ing, the prevention techniques must update 
alongside too. Without proper security in the knowledge management system, there could be a 
loss of valuable knowledge.  
 
Weak Incident Response Plan : Security breaches can come as well from poor planning 
for events or a weak incident response plan.  
In an organization these potential threats and vulnerabilities could lead to pati ent bring harmed, financial 
losses, legal penalties , and loss of patients trust.  
ISO Standard 27001:  
The most widely followed standard for maintaining and establishing Information Security Management 
System (ISMS) is ISO 27001. This standard provides a framework to manage sensitive information. 
Including knowledge in healthcare.      
 
  4 
 Organizations can implement these controls from ISO 27001 to protect the healthcare kn owledge:  
- Access Control: Enforcing strict user authentication and authorization  protocols to limit 
access to sensitive knowledge.  
 
- Physical Security : Implementing measures to protect physical location s where knowledge is 
stored, such as server rooms.  
 
- Incident Management : Developing and regularly testing incident and response plans to 
ensure readiness  in case of server rooms . 
 
- Human resource Security : Conducting background checks and providing security training 
to employees with access to sensitive kn owledge.  
 
- Asset Management : Identifying  and classifying knowledge assets to ensure their protection 
and proper management.  
By applying these standards of ISO 27001, a healthcare organization can secure sensi tive knowledge 
and improve Informatio n Security of the organization.  
Management Strategies to Minimize risk:  
After going over all potential threats and weaknesses, let's talk about how the organization can reduce 
risks. The following is a list of measures:  
- Data loss prevention tools:  Implementing technology or methods to stop illegal access to 
or distribution of sensitive information is known as data loss prevention.  
 
- Logging and monitoring: Applying the logging and monitoring concept in the company to 
control who gains access to certain sensitive information.     
 
  5 
  
-  Policy Development : Setting up well -defined, strict guidelines where knowledge 
management is concerned, for example, those concerning the sharing and use of this crucial 
knowledge asset.  
 
- Employee Education Programs:  Conducting training sessions periodically for the staff 
members to refresh them with security awareness and the importance of knowledge protection.  
 
- Frequent Audits:  Performing periodic assessments to assess and ensure compliance with 
security standards and initiating necessary changes.           
Governance, Assurance and Control Mechanism:  
For managing risk associated with healthcare knowledge effective governance is essential. An 
organization must assign clear roles and responsibilities for information security, with the help  of the 
senior management.  
1. Assurance Mechanism:  
- Internal and External Audits:  Conducting regular audits can help the organization 
examine the effectiveness of protection measures of knowledge and identify vulnerabilities.  
 
- Testing Inci dent Response Plans : Organization should conduct  Testing and  drills to 
be prepared for potential security incidents/  
 
2. Control Mechanism:  
- Access Logs:  Organization should maintain logs to be able to keep record of who 
accessed knowledge to monitor unauthorized access.  
    
 
  6 
 - Monitoring System : Organization should implement a system that will detect and 
respond to any threats or unauthori zed access.  
By applying governance,  assurance, and control mechanisms  a healthcare organization can avoid any 
security risk and enhance their information security  and maintain  trust of patients.  
Conclusion:  
In conclusion, Data, Information and Knowledge are important concepts in healthcare organizations. This 
concept helps in organizations decision -making and patient care. The interrelationship between these 
concepts is important for better risk management and information  security.  
Implementing ISO 27001 standard in a healthcare org anization can mitigate risk and improve security 
framework. Also, applying risk mitigation strategies  and governance and control mechanisms  is ways to 
strengthen the security of knowledge. In conclusion, by implementing standards , strategies, etc, it is 
important to protect this data for maintain  organizational integrity , patient safety and ensuring public trust 
in healthcare system.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
References:  
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6435353/  
https://ivypanda.com/essays/defining -data-information -and-knowledge/     
 
  7 
 https://ivypanda.com/essays/data -information -knowledge -and-wisdom -in-
healthcare/  
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1155/2022/3383251  
Chatgpt.ai  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 